KB Article - Setup Prometheus and Grafana (#1747)
temporalio/documentation: kb/prometheus-grafana-setup.md

<!-- truncate -->

In this article, we discuss setting up Prometheus and Grafana to view metrics data on Temporal Server, Temporal Client, and Temporal Worker performance.

Each section describes the steps to setting up Prometheus and Grafana, and an example on how you can do this in your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster setup and with the Java SDK.
If you’re following through with implementing the examples, ensure that you have your local docker-compose setup, added your SDK, and have a sample application to work with (you can clone the SDK samples repositories to get started with).

- See [Run a dev Cluster](/application-development/foundations#run-a-dev-cluster) for details on how to set up your local Temporal docker-compose.
- See [Add your SDK](/application-development/foundations#add-your-sdk) for details on how to add your SDK and get started with samples.
- Create your own sample from the workshops or tutorials, or [clone an existing sample/or example](/application-development/foundations?lang=java#code-samples).

## Prometheus setup and configuration

> The Temporal Cluster and SDKs emit all metrics by default. You must enable Prometheus on your Cluster to collect these metrics.

Author: updated to "However, you must enable Prometheus in your application code (using the Temporal SDKs) and your Cluster configuration to collect the metrics emitted from your SDK and Cluster."

### Cluster Metrics setup

To enable Prometheus to receive metrics data, set listen addresses in the Server configuration for Prometheus to scrap from.

The [docker-compose setup](https://github.com/temporalio/docker-compose/blob/0bca458992ef5135700dcd9369a53fcda30356b0/docker-compose.yml) provided for local development sets up most Temporal Services in one Docker container.

Here’s an example for how to expose a Prometheus endpoint on your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster configuration:

```
version: "3.5"
services:
#...

  temporal:
   container_name: temporal
   depends_on:
     - postgresql
     - elasticsearch
   environment:
     - DB=postgresql
     - DB_PORT=5432
     - POSTGRES_USER=temporal
     - POSTGRES_PWD=temporal
     - POSTGRES_SEEDS=postgresql
     - DYNAMIC_CONFIG_FILE_PATH=config/dynamicconfig/development-sql.yaml
     - ENABLE_ES=true
     - ES_SEEDS=elasticsearch
     - ES_VERSION=v7
     - PROMETHEUS_ENDPOINT=0.0.0.0:8000 #expose a port for Prometheus
   image: temporalio/auto-setup:${TEMPORAL_VERSION}
   networks:
     - temporal-network
   ports:
     - 7233:7233

>      - 8000:8000

Author: ```suggestion
     - 8000:8000 #and add your port
```

You can set up as many targets as required.
Note that these SDK metrics ports must be set in your application and are discussed in the [SDK Metrics](#sdkmetricssetup) section for details.

See [Prometheus configuration](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/) for more information.

To check whether you’re receiving your metrics data, start your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster with the configuration provided in the examples here) and go to

- http://localhost:8000/metrics - this is the port you’re exposing your Cluster metrics on. You should see all the server metrics emitted when you start up your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
- http://localhost:8077/metrics - this is the port you’re exposing your SDK metrics on. Depending on whether you have set this port on the Client that is starting your Worker or your Workflow Executions, the related metrics should show when you start your Worker or Workflow Execution.

> - http://localhost:8078/metrics - this is the port you’re exposing your SDK metrics on. Depending on whether you have set this port on the Client that is starting your Worker or your Workflow Executions, the related metrics should show when you start your Worker or Workflow Execution.

Reviewer: These are the same explanation?

Author: Yes. Depending on what you assign the ports to in your app code, you'll see the relevant metrics.

You can also check your Prometheus targets statuses at http://localhost:9090/.

## Grafana configuration

With Prometheus set up, you can configure Grafana to use Prometheus as a datasource.

For example, in the modified local docker-compose Temporal Cluster setup described in the previous section, you can create a separate container for Grafana, and set it up to display metrics visualizations on port 8085.

```
version: "3.5"
services:
#...
  grafana:
   container_name: grafana
   image: grafana/grafana:7.5.16
   environment:
     - GF_AUTH_DISABLE_LOGIN_FORM=true
     - GF_AUTH_ANONYMOUS_ENABLED=true
     - GF_AUTH_ANONYMOUS_ORG_ROLE=Admin
   ports:
     - 8085:3000
   volumes:
     - type: bind
       source: ./deployment/grafana/provisioning/datasources

>        target: /etc/grafana/provisioning/datasources

Reviewer: I had to create this directory for docker compose to start

   depends_on:
     - prometheus
#...
```

In this example, we have set up Grafana without authorizations; this is not a good practice and is not recommended. See the [Grafana documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/) for details on how to customize your Grafana setup.

Set Prometheus as your datasource for Grafana at the source path defined in the configuration. You can do this either on the UI or in your Grafana deployment configuration.

> In the example above, the data sources are defined in the deployment configuration at ./deployment/grafana/provisioning/datasource, for example, as:

Author: ```suggestion
In the example above, the data sources are defined in the Grafana deployment configuration in a configuration YAML file at ./deployment/grafana/provisioning/datasource, for example, as:
```

```
apiVersion: 1

datasources:
 - name: 'Temporal Prometheus'
   type: 'prometheus'
   org_id: 1
   url: 'http://prometheus:9090'
   is_default: true
   version: 1
   editable: true
```

In this example, Grafana is set to pull metrics from Prometheus at the port 9090, as defined in the Prometheus configuration.
After you update this configuration, restart your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster, and go to [localhost:8085](http://localhost:8085) to access Grafana.

> Set up your dashboards in Grafana, using either the UI or configure your dashboards in your Grafana deployment on the server, as done in this example. Temporal also has a [repository of community-driven dashboards](https://github.com/temporalio/dashboards) that you can get started with.

Author: ```suggestion
Set up your dashboards in Grafana, using either the UI or configure your dashboards in your Grafana deployment on the server, as done in this [example](https://github.com/tsurdilo/my-temporal-dockercompose/tree/main/deployment/grafana/dashboards). 
Temporal also has a [repository of community-driven dashboards](https://github.com/temporalio/dashboards) that you can get started with.
```

---
slug: prometheus-grafana-setup
title: Setting up Prometheus and Grafana
tags:
  - kb-article
date: 2022-10-31T00:00:00Z
---

The Temporal Cluster and SDKs emit metrics that can be used to monitor performance and troubleshoot issues. To collect and aggregate these metrics, you can use one of the following:

- Prometheus
- StatsD
- M3

Once you have enabled your monitoring tool, you can relay these metrics to any monitoring and observability platform.

<!-- truncate -->

> In this article, we discuss setting up Prometheus and Grafana to view metrics data on Temporal Server, Temporal Client, and Temporal Worker performance.

Author: ```suggestion
In this article, we discuss setting up Prometheus and Grafana to view metrics data on Temporal Cluster, Temporal Client, and Temporal Worker performance.
```

Each section describes the steps to setting up Prometheus and Grafana, and an example on how you can do this in your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster setup and with the Java SDK.

> If you’re following through with implementing the examples, ensure that you have your local docker-compose setup, added your SDK, and have a sample application to work with (you can clone the SDK samples repositories to get started with).

Author: ```suggestion
If you’re following through with implementing the examples, ensure that you have your local docker-compose set up, added your SDK, and have a sample application to work with (you can clone the SDK samples repositories to get started with).
```

- See [Run a dev Cluster](/application-development/foundations#docker-compose) for details on how to set up your local Temporal docker-compose.
- See [Add your SDK](/application-development/foundations#add-your-sdk) for details on how to add your SDK and get started with samples.
- Create your own sample from the workshops or tutorials, or [clone an existing sample/or example](/application-development/foundations?lang=java#code-samples).

## Prometheus setup and configuration

The Temporal Cluster and SDKs emit all metrics by default.
However, you must enable Prometheus in your application code (using the Temporal SDKs) and your Cluster configuration to collect the metrics emitted from your SDK and Cluster.

> ### Cluster Metrics setup

Author: ```suggestion
### Cluster metrics setup
```

To enable Prometheus to receive metrics data, set listen addresses in the Server configuration for Prometheus to scrap from.

The [docker-compose setup](https://github.com/temporalio/docker-compose/blob/0bca458992ef5135700dcd9369a53fcda30356b0/docker-compose.yml) provided for local development sets up most Temporal Services in one Docker container.

Here’s an example for how to expose a Prometheus endpoint on your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster configuration:

```
version: "3.5"
services:
#...

  temporal:
   container_name: temporal
   depends_on:
     - postgresql
     - elasticsearch
   environment:
     - DB=postgresql
     - DB_PORT=5432
     - POSTGRES_USER=temporal
     - POSTGRES_PWD=temporal
     - POSTGRES_SEEDS=postgresql
     - DYNAMIC_CONFIG_FILE_PATH=config/dynamicconfig/development-sql.yaml
     - ENABLE_ES=true
     - ES_SEEDS=elasticsearch
     - ES_VERSION=v7
     - PROMETHEUS_ENDPOINT=0.0.0.0:8000 #expose a port for Prometheus
   image: temporalio/auto-setup:${TEMPORAL_VERSION}
   networks:
     - temporal-network
   ports:
     - 7233:7233
     - 8000:8000 #add your port
   volumes:
     - ./dynamicconfig:/etc/temporal/config/dynamicconfig
#...
```

> Depending on how you deploy your Temporal Cluster, you can set different ports for each Temporal Service, as done in this example where each Temporal Service is deployed as a separate container.

Author: ```suggestion
Depending on how you deploy your Temporal Cluster, you can set different ports for each Temporal Service, as done in [this example](https://github.com/tsurdilo/my-temporal-dockercompose.git) where each Temporal Service is deployed as a separate container.
```

                         "workerCustomTag2Value"))
            .reporter(reporter)
            .reportEvery(com.uber.m3.util.Duration.ofSeconds(10));

  // for Prometheus collection, expose the scrape endpoint at port 8077. For example,
  HttpServer scrapeEndpoint = MetricsUtils.startPrometheusScrapeEndpoint(registry, 8077);
  // Stopping the starter will stop the http server that exposes the
  // scrape endpoint.
  //Runtime.getRuntime().addShutdownHook(new Thread(() -> scrapeEndpoint.stop(1)));

  //Create WF service stubs to connect to the front end service.
  WorkflowServiceStubs service = WorkflowServiceStubs.newServiceStubs(
         WorkflowServiceStubsOptions.newBuilder()
                 .setMetricsScope(scope) //set the metrics scope for the WorkflowServiceStubs
                 .build());

  //Create a Workflow service client which can be used to start, Signal, and Query Workflow Executions.
  WorkflowClient yourClient = WorkflowClient.newInstance(service,
         WorkflowClientOptions.newBuilder().build());

  //...
```

You can set up separate scrape endpoints in your Clients that you use to start your Workers and Workflow Executions.

> To use this example, add this example code with the Prometheus endpoint on port 8077 in your Worker program, and use `yourClient` to start your Workers. Similarly, in your starter code, add this example code and set the Prometheus endpoint to port 8078, create a `WorkflowServiceStub` with the metric scope, and create a Workflow Client to start Workflow Exeutions.

Author: ```suggestion
To use this example, add this example code with the Prometheus endpoint on port 8077 in your Worker program, and use `yourClient` to start your Workers. 
Similarly, in your starter code, add this example code and set the Prometheus endpoint to port 8078,  create a Workflow Client and use it to start your Workflow Execution. 
```

  // for Prometheus collection, expose the scrape endpoint at port 8077. For example,
  HttpServer scrapeEndpoint = MetricsUtils.startPrometheusScrapeEndpoint(registry, 8077);
  // Stopping the starter will stop the http server that exposes the
  // scrape endpoint.
  //Runtime.getRuntime().addShutdownHook(new Thread(() -> scrapeEndpoint.stop(1)));

  //Create WF service stubs to connect to the front end service.
  WorkflowServiceStubs service = WorkflowServiceStubs.newServiceStubs(
         WorkflowServiceStubsOptions.newBuilder()
                 .setMetricsScope(scope) //set the metrics scope for the WorkflowServiceStubs
                 .build());

  //Create a Workflow service client which can be used to start, Signal, and Query Workflow Executions.
  WorkflowClient yourClient = WorkflowClient.newInstance(service,
         WorkflowClientOptions.newBuilder().build());

  //...
```

You can set up separate scrape endpoints in your Clients that you use to start your Workers and Workflow Executions.
To use this example, add this example code with the Prometheus endpoint on port 8077 in your Worker program, and use `yourClient` to start your Workers. 

> Similarly, in your starter code, add this example code and set the Prometheus endpoint to port 8078,  create a Workflow Client and use it to start your Workflow Execution. 

Author: ```suggestion
Similarly, in your starter code, add this example code and set the Prometheus endpoint to port 8078,  create a Workflow Client (as described in the code example), and use it to start your Workflow Execution. 
```

```
global:
 scrape_interval: 10s
scrape_configs:
 - job_name: 'temporalmetrics'
   metrics_path: /metrics
   scheme: http
   static_configs:
     # Cluster metrics target
     - targets:
         - 'host.docker.internal:8000'
       labels:
         group: 'server-metrics'

     # Local app targets (if configured)
     - targets:
         - 'host.docker.internal:8077'
         - 'host.docker.internal:8078'
       labels:
         group: 'sdk-metrics'
```

In this example, we have created a YAML configuration file setting up Prometheus to scrape at 10 seconds interval, and to listen for Cluster metrics on `host.docker.internal:8000` and SDK metrics on two targets `host.docker.internal:8077` and `host.docker.internal:8078`.
The `8077` and `8078` ports must be set on `WorkflowServiceStubs` in your application code with your preferred SDK, and can be used to create Workers and make Client API calls to start Workflow Executions, send Signals, Queries etc. See the [SDK Metrics](#sdk-metrics-setup) section for details.
You can set up as many targets as required.

> See [Prometheus configuration](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/) for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
For more details on how to configure Prometheus, refer the [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/).
```

To check whether you’re receiving your metrics data, start your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster (with the configuration provided in the examples here) and check:

> - http://localhost:8000/metrics - this is the port you’re exposing your Cluster metrics on. You should see all the Cluster metrics emitted when you start up your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.

Author: ```suggestion
- [localhost:8000/metrics](http://localhost:8000/metrics) - this is the port you’re exposing your Cluster metrics on. You should see all the Cluster metrics emitted when you start up your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
```

> - http://localhost:8077/metrics - this is the port you’re exposing your SDK metrics on. Depending on whether you have set this port on the Client that is starting your Worker or your Workflow Executions, the related metrics should show when you start your Worker or Workflow Execution.

Author: ```suggestion
- [localhost:8077/metrics](http://localhost:8077/metrics) - this is the port you’re exposing your SDK metrics on. Depending on whether you have set this port on the Client that is starting your Worker or your Workflow Executions, the related metrics should show when you start your Worker or Workflow Execution.
```

> - http://localhost:8078/metrics - this is the port you’re exposing your SDK metrics on. Depending on whether you have set this port on the Client that is starting your Worker or your Workflow Executions, the related metrics should show when you start your Worker or Workflow Execution.

Author: ```suggestion
- [localhost:8078/metrics](http://localhost:8078/metrics) - this is the port you’re exposing your SDK metrics on. Depending on whether you have set this port on the Client that is starting your Worker or your Workflow Executions, the related metrics should show when you start your Worker or Workflow Execution.
```

> - http://localhost:9090/ - this is the port set for Prometheus detail; Go to Status > Targets to check the statuses of all your Prometheus target endpoints.

Author: ```suggestion
- [localhost:9090/](http://localhost:9090/) - this is the port set for Prometheus detail; Go to Status > Targets to check the statuses of all your Prometheus target endpoints.
```

## Grafana configuration

> With Prometheus set up, you can configure Grafana to use Prometheus as a datasource.

Author: ```suggestion
With Prometheus set up, add and configure Grafana to use Prometheus as a datasource.
```

> For example, in the modified local docker-compose Temporal Cluster setup described in the previous section, you can create a separate container with port 8085 for Grafana.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, in the modified local docker-compose Temporal Cluster setup described in the previous section, create a separate container with port 8085 for Grafana.
```

```
version: "3.5"
services:
#...
  grafana:
   container_name: grafana
   image: grafana/grafana:7.5.16
   environment:
     - GF_AUTH_DISABLE_LOGIN_FORM=true
     - GF_AUTH_ANONYMOUS_ENABLED=true
     - GF_AUTH_ANONYMOUS_ORG_ROLE=Admin
   ports:
     - 8085:3000
   volumes:
     - type: bind
       source: ./deployment/grafana/provisioning/datasources
       target: /etc/grafana/provisioning/datasources
   depends_on:
     - prometheus
#...
```

> In this example, we have set up Grafana to start without authorizations; this is not a good practice and is not recommended. See the [Grafana documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/) for details on how to customize your Grafana setup.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that in this example, we have set up Grafana to start without authorizations; this is not a good practice and is not recommended. 
For more information on how to custimize your Grafana setup, see the [Grafana documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/).
```

Set Prometheus as your datasource for Grafana at the source path defined in the configuration. You can do this either on the UI or in your Grafana deployment configuration.

For the example above, create a configuration file (for example - config.yml) file at ./deployment/grafana/provisioning/datasource in your docker-compose Temporal Cluster project and configure the Prometheus data source for Grafana, as shown:

```
apiVersion: 1

datasources:
 - name: 'Temporal Prometheus'
   type: 'prometheus'
   org_id: 1
   url: 'http://prometheus:9090'
   is_default: true
   version: 1
   editable: true
```

In this example, Grafana is set to pull metrics from Prometheus at the port 9090, as defined in the Prometheus configuration.
After you update this configuration, restart your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster, and go to [localhost:8085](http://localhost:8085) to access Grafana.

### Grafana dashboard setup

Set up your dashboards in Grafana, using either the UI or configure your dashboards in your Grafana deployment on the Cluster, as done in this [example](https://github.com/tsurdilo/my-temporal-dockercompose/tree/main/deployment/grafana/dashboards).

> When you create a new dashboard, add your Prometheus query to call specific metrics.

Author: ```suggestion
In your Grafana dashboard, add your Prometheus query to call specific metrics.
```

The [Temporal Cluster Metrics reference](/references/cluster-metrics) describes a few metrics and queries that you can get started with.

For example, to create a dashboard in your local Grafana UI at [localhost:8085](http://localhost:8085):

1. Go to Create > Dashboard, and add an empty panel.
2. On the Panel configuration page, in the Query tab, select "Temporal Prometheus" as the datasource.
3. In the Metrics field, copy any of the queries listed in the [Temporal Cluster Metrics reference](/references/cluster-metrics);

>    For example, add `sum by (operation) (rate(service_requests{service_name="frontend"}[2m]))` to see all the Fronted Service requests on your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.

Author: ```suggestion
   For example, add `sum by (operation) (rate(service_requests{service_name="frontend"}[2m]))` to see all the Frontend Service requests on your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
```

4. You should see the graph show metrics data for the Frontend Service from the docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
5. When you start your Workflows (after setting up your SDK Metrics), you will see your SDK metrics in the graph as well.
6. Optional: In the Legend field, add "{{operation}}" to clean the legend on the graph to show operations.

You can add multiple queries in your dashboard to report relevant data.
For more details on configuring Grafana dashboards, see the [Grafana Dashboards documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/).

Once you have your dashboard set up, you can start experimenting with different samples provided in the Temporal samples repositories.

> Temporal also has a [repository of community-driven dashboards](https://github.com/temporalio/dashboards) that you can get started with. You can set these up in your Grafana configuration to show the dashboards by default when you start your Cluster. See the

Author: ```suggestion
Temporal also has a [repository of community-driven dashboards](https://github.com/temporalio/dashboards) that you can get started with. You can set these up in your Grafana configuration to show the dashboards by default when you start your Cluster. 
```

1. Go to Create > Dashboard, and add an empty panel.
2. On the Panel configuration page, in the Query tab, select "Temporal Prometheus" as the datasource.
3. In the Metrics field, copy any of the queries listed in the [Temporal Cluster Metrics reference](/references/cluster-metrics);
   For example, add `sum by (operation) (rate(service_requests{service_name="frontend"}[2m]))` to see all the Frontend Service requests on your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
4. You should see the graph show metrics data for the Frontend Service from the docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
5. When you start your Workflows (after setting up your SDK Metrics), you will see your SDK metrics in the graph as well.
6. Optional: In the Legend field, add "{{operation}}" to clean the legend on the graph to show operations.

You can add multiple queries in your dashboard to report relevant data.
For more details on configuring Grafana dashboards, see the [Grafana Dashboards documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/).

Once you have your dashboard set up, you can start experimenting with different samples provided in the Temporal samples repositories.

> Temporal also has a [repository of community-driven dashboards](https://github.com/temporalio/dashboards) that you can get started with. You can set these up in your Grafana configuration to show the dashboards by default when you start your Cluster. 

Author: ```suggestion
Temporal also has a [repository of community-driven dashboards](https://github.com/temporalio/dashboards) that you can get started with. You can set these up in your Grafana configuration to show the dashboards by default when you start your Cluster. 
Note that if you are following the examples provided here, and importing a dashboard from the community-driven dashboards repository, check and update the datasource for each panel to Temporal Prometheus.
```

   For example, add `sum by (operation) (rate(service_requests{service_name="frontend"}[2m]))` to see all the Frontend Service requests on your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
4. You should see the graph show metrics data for the Frontend Service from the docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
5. When you start your Workflows (after setting up your SDK Metrics), you will see your SDK metrics in the graph as well.
6. Optional: In the Legend field, add "{{operation}}" to clean the legend on the graph to show operations.

You can add multiple queries in your dashboard to report relevant data.
For more details on configuring Grafana dashboards, see the [Grafana Dashboards documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/).

Once you have your dashboard set up, you can start experimenting with different samples provided in the Temporal samples repositories.

Temporal also has a [repository of community-driven dashboards](https://github.com/temporalio/dashboards) that you can get started with. You can set these up in your Grafana configuration to show the dashboards by default when you start your Cluster. 

> Note that if you are following the examples provided here, and importing a dashboard from the community-driven dashboards repository, check and update the datasource for each panel to Temporal Prometheus.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that if you are following the examples provided here, and importing a dashboard from the community-driven dashboards repository, check and update the datasource for each panel to "Temporal Prometheus" (which is the name we defined for the Prometheus data source in the [Grafana configuration](#grafana-configuration) section.
```

For more examples on how this is set across SDKs, see the metrics samples:

- [Java SDK Samples](https://github.com/temporalio/samples-java/tree/main/src/main/java/io/temporal/samples/metrics)
- [Go SDK Samples](https://github.com/temporalio/samples-go/tree/main/metrics)

In your Workers, you can set specific WorkerOptions for performance tuning, as described in the [Worker Performance Guide](/application-development/worker-performance).
With the scrape endpoints set, define your Prometheus scrape configuration and targets to receive the metrics data from the Temporal Cluster and Temporal SDKs.

### Prometheus configuration

Enable Prometheus to scrape the metrics from the endpoints defined in the Cluster and SDK configurations.

For example with the local docker-compose Temporal Cluster, you can create a separate container for Prometheus:

```
version: "3.5"
services:
#...
  prometheus:
   container_name: prometheus
   image: prom/prometheus:v2.37.0
   ports:
     - 9090:9090
   volumes:
     - type: bind
       source:./deployment/prometheus/config.yml
       target: /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
   depends_on:
     - temporal
#...
```

> In this example, we use a Prometheus docker image for v2.37.0 and the default ports for the container, and set the path to a Prometheus configuration file for the docker container. For this example, create a Prometheus config.yml file at ./deployment/prometheus in your docker-compose Temporal Cluster project.

Reviewer: Re: version of prometheus -
Maybe link to where the current Prometheus docker build image is listed: https://hub.docker.com/r/prom/prometheus

     - targets:
         - 'host.docker.internal:8000'
       labels:
         group: 'server-metrics'

     # Local app targets (if configured)
     - targets:
         - 'host.docker.internal:8077'
         - 'host.docker.internal:8078'
       labels:
         group: 'sdk-metrics'
```

In this example, Prometheus is configured to scrape at 10 seconds interval, and to listen for Cluster metrics on `host.docker.internal:8000` and SDK metrics on two targets `host.docker.internal:8077` and `host.docker.internal:8078`.
The `8077` and `8078` ports must be set on `WorkflowServiceStubs` in your application code with your preferred SDK, and can be used to create Workers and make Client API calls to start Workflow Executions, send Signals, Queries etc. See the [SDK Metrics](#sdk-metrics-setup) section for details.
You can set up as many targets as required.

For more details on how to configure Prometheus, refer the [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/).

To check whether you’re receiving your metrics data, restart your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster (with the configuration provided in the examples here) and check:

> - [localhost:8000/metrics](http://localhost:8000/metrics) - this is the port you’re exposing your Cluster metrics on. You should see all the Cluster metrics emitted when you start up your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
> - [localhost:8077/metrics](http://localhost:8077/metrics) - this is the port you’re exposing your SDK metrics on. Depending on whether you have set this port on the Client that is starting your Worker or your Workflow Executions, the related metrics should show when you start your Worker or Workflow Execution.
> - [localhost:8078/metrics](http://localhost:8078/metrics) - this is the port you’re exposing your SDK metrics on. Depending on whether you have set this port on the Client that is starting your Worker or your Workflow Executions, the related metrics should show when you start your Worker or Workflow Execution.
> - [localhost:9090/](http://localhost:9090/) - this is the port set for Prometheus detail; Go to Status > Targets to check the statuses of all your Prometheus target endpoints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [localhost:8000/metrics](http://localhost:8000/metrics) - The port for exposing your Cluster metrics.
  You should see all the Cluster metrics emitted when you start your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
- [localhost:8077/metrics](http://localhost:8077/metrics) - The port for exposing your SDK metrics.
  Depending on whether you have set this port on the Client that is starting your Worker or your Workflow Executions, the related metrics should show when you start your Worker or Workflow Execution.
- [localhost:8078/metrics](http://localhost:8078/metrics) - The port for exposing your SDK metrics.
  Depending on whether you have set this port on the Client that is starting your Worker or your Workflow Executions, the related metrics should show when you start your Worker or Workflow Execution.
- [localhost:9090/](http://localhost:9090/) - The port for Prometheus detail.
  Go to **Status > Targets** to check the statuses of your Prometheus target endpoints.
```

## Grafana configuration

> With Prometheus set up, set up Grafana to use Prometheus as a data source.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Prometheus configured, set up Grafana to use Prometheus as a data source.
```
Just to avoid the echo of "set up, set up".

For example, in the modified local docker-compose Temporal Cluster setup described in the previous section, create a separate container with port 8085 for Grafana.

```
version: "3.5"
services:
#...
  grafana:
   container_name: grafana
   image: grafana/grafana:7.5.16
   environment:
     - GF_AUTH_DISABLE_LOGIN_FORM=true
     - GF_AUTH_ANONYMOUS_ENABLED=true
     - GF_AUTH_ANONYMOUS_ORG_ROLE=Admin
   ports:
     - 8085:3000
   volumes:
     - type: bind
       source: ./deployment/grafana/provisioning/datasources
       target: /etc/grafana/provisioning/datasources
   depends_on:
     - prometheus
#...
```

Note that in this example, Grafana is set up to start without authorizations; this is not a good practice and is not recommended.

> For more information on how to custimize your Grafana setup, see the [Grafana documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information on how to customize your Grafana setup, see the [Grafana documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/).
```

> Next, configure Grafana to use Prometheus as the datasource. You can do this either on the UI or in your Grafana deployment configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, configure Grafana to use Prometheus as the data source.
You can do this either on the UI or in your Grafana deployment configuration.
```

> For the example above, create a configuration file (for example - config.yml) file at ./deployment/grafana/provisioning/datasource in your docker-compose Temporal Cluster project and configure the Prometheus data source for Grafana, as shown:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the preceding example, create a configuration file (for example, config.yml) at `./deployment/grafana/provisioning/datasource` in your docker-compose Temporal Cluster project and configure the Prometheus data source for Grafana, as shown:
```

```
apiVersion: 1

datasources:
 - name: 'Temporal Prometheus'
   type: 'prometheus'
   org_id: 1
   url: 'http://prometheus:9090'
   is_default: true
   version: 1
   editable: true
```

In this example, Grafana is set to pull metrics from Prometheus at the port 9090, as defined in the Prometheus configuration.
After you update this configuration, restart your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster, and go to [localhost:8085](http://localhost:8085) to access Grafana.

### Grafana dashboard setup

> Set up your dashboards in Grafana, using either the UI or configure your dashboards in your Grafana deployment on the Cluster, as done in this [example](https://github.com/tsurdilo/my-temporal-dockercompose/tree/main/deployment/grafana/dashboards).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To set up your dashboards in Grafana, either use the UI or configure them in your Grafana deployment on the Cluster, as done in this [dashboards](https://github.com/tsurdilo/my-temporal-dockercompose/tree/main/deployment/grafana/dashboards) example.
```

In your Grafana dashboard, add your Prometheus query to call specific metrics.
The [Temporal Cluster Metrics reference](/references/cluster-metrics) describes a few metrics and queries that you can get started with.

For example, to create a dashboard in your local Grafana UI at [localhost:8085](http://localhost:8085):

> 1. Go to Create > Dashboard, and add an empty panel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Go to **Create > Dashboard**, and add an empty panel.
```

> 2. On the Panel configuration page, in the Query tab, select "Temporal Prometheus" as the datasource.
> 3. In the Metrics field, copy any of the queries listed in the [Temporal Cluster Metrics reference](/references/cluster-metrics);
>    For example, add `sum by (operation) (rate(service_requests{service_name="frontend"}[2m]))` to see all the Frontend Service requests on your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. On the **Panel configuration** page, in the **Query** tab, select **Temporal Prometheus** as the data source.
3. In the **Metrics** field, copy any of the queries listed in the [Temporal Cluster Metrics reference](/references/cluster-metrics).
   For example, add `sum by (operation) (rate(service_requests{service_name="frontend"}[2m]))` to see all the Frontend Service requests on your local docker-compose Temporal Cluster.
```

> 4. You should see the graph show metrics data for the Frontend Service from the docker-compose Temporal Cluster.

Reviewer 2: What does one do with the query copied in the preceding step?

Author: good point; you paste the Query in the metrics field to start seeing data in the graph. updated this to:
"In the Metrics field, use any of the queries listed in the [Temporal Cluster Metrics reference](/references/cluster-metrics);"

5. When you start your Workflows (after setting up your SDK Metrics), you will see your SDK metrics in the graph as well.
6. Optional: In the Legend field, add "{{operation}}" to clean the legend on the graph to show operations.

You can add multiple queries in your dashboard to report relevant data.
For more details on configuring Grafana dashboards, see the [Grafana Dashboards documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/).

> Once you have your dashboard set up, you can start experimenting with different samples provided in the Temporal samples repositories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After you set up your dashboard, you can start experimenting with different samples provided in the Temporal samples repositories.
```

> Temporal also has a [repository of community-driven dashboards](https://github.com/temporalio/dashboards) that you can get started with.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Temporal also has a repository of community-driven [Grafana dashboards](https://github.com/temporalio/dashboards) that you can get started with.
```

You can set these up in your Grafana configuration to show the dashboards by default when you start your Cluster.

> Note that if you are following the examples provided here, and importing a dashboard from the community-driven dashboards repository, check and update the datasource for each panel to "Temporal Prometheus" (which is the name set for the Prometheus data source in the [Grafana configuration](#grafana-configuration) section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are following the examples provided here and importing a dashboard from the community-driven dashboards repository, update the data source for each panel to "Temporal Prometheus" (which is the name set for the Prometheus data source in the [Grafana configuration](#grafana-configuration) section).
```
